Questions at the end if you'd like in your hands.
Good morning and thank you for the opportunity
to present on the bill.
If the committee's amenable, I'll open
with a short statement before moving straight to questions.
So we take our submission as read,
noting it should be considered alongside the NZBA
submission as well.
We fully understand the intent of the bill, which seeks
to ensure that people and businesses retain access
to banking services and that these are not withdrawn
for arbitrary reasons and we wholeheartedly
support that sentiment.
Where we differ from the bill is the characterization
of ESG assessments as moralizing,
when in reality these assessments are a part
of prudent risk management
and commercial decision making on a case by case basis.
Equally, we do not see evidence
of the systemic harm this bill is looking to fix.
Very happy to take questions.
Thanks ya. That was very succinct.
Um, members, are there any questions
on the Westpac submission? Uh, Andy Foster.
Well thanks. Thank you, Catherine.
Thank you for being so succinct with that gives us a bit
of time to ask, ask some questions.
Um, look, the first one of 'em, um, thank you very much for,
um, the work that you're doing in terms of access
around the, um, sort
of more disadvantaged part of the community.
So I really appreciated that.
Um, what you said is you supported the intention, um,
of trying to make sure that everybody's got access,
reasonable access to financial services.
So thank you for that.
Um, where though, where
the question I think we're wrestling with is
where is the balance between making a decision, uh,
thinking, thinking in terms of industries, a decision, uh,
about a, an industry being, say a, a quite sunset industry,
um, and that becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In other words, if, if banks, uh, one
or more banks start with drawing services for a particular,
uh, industry particular, um, groups of organizations,
doesn't that make it a self-fulfilling pro?
They then become a sunset industry
because become becomes increasingly difficult for 'em
to operate, more expensive to reach,
to get financial services and so on.
How do we get that balance right,
because I'm hearing you don't like the wording of the bill,
but not necessarily post the intention of saying we
that financial services are really important to,
to get and how do we do that?
So I think the first thing that's important
to distinguish is between, uh,
banking services is in having a bank account and lending.
So for banking services, uh, we attempt to bank, uh,
everybody that we can.
There are broadly two exceptions to that.
One, where we are concerned about our anti-money laundering,
uh, requirements or secondly
where we are concerned about the health
and safety of our staff.
Um, and each of those are looked at on a case by case basis,
lending decisions.
It's really important that they're commercial.
Um, and they, there is a variety of, so one,
people can continue to invest in their businesses,
uh, without borrowing.
Two, there's a broad range of, uh, organizations
that can lend to help a business grow.
And there are many businesses today
that in their early stages, banks aren't the right place,
uh, to support them anyway because of the risk
and return, uh, that that represents.
So startups is a good example of that.
And so I think that banks need to have
that commercial decision making
'cause we are commercial organizations.
But I also think to your balance point, that there is a role
that the regulators can and do play.
We have the conduct of financial
institutions bill as you know.
Um, if there is a concern that says that banks are
overly uh, rapidly exiting, uh, industries, then
that can be addressed, uh,
through giving a steer to the regulators.
We don't think that the additional compliance costs required
with the construct of this bill, uh, actually hit
that trade off of cost benefit analysis.
Thank you. Uh, and I guess some of the other members
of the committee will be more familiar with the way in which
that works, but, uh, it'd be helpful for me anyway.
Uh, if you could just, uh, spell out how that, uh, direction
to regulators might, uh, what it might look like, uh, if,
uh, government were concerned that an industry was, um,
you know, seeing a lot
of financial institutions walking away from supporting it.
Um, so one, I think the regulators, uh,
would probably be far better to answer
that question, uh, than I would.
But certainly what I've um, seen is
that a clear steer from the government sometimes
to a regulator, uh,
does result in changes from an industry perspective.
Um, so I, I think there are many mechanisms, uh,
at the government's, uh, behest, uh,
if they've got a concern that they want to address,
but we don't see the systemic, uh, concerns
that the bill is trying to address.
Thank you. Thanks.
We've got a question from David Wilson.
Are you just on mute there, David? Oh, you're frozen.
Can you hear me? Yep. Yes.
Um, Catherine, very pleased to hear
that you're addressing access to banking services.
Um, our research has uncovered 50,000 approximately in
New Zealand that are in that situation.
So thank you for doing that.
Um, I suppose probably one of the interesting
conundrums we have here is
that essentially ESG is a modern governance tool
and it's relatively recent in terms of its approach
and how you determine, as you
and a number of others have said, risk.
Um, I, I suppose the problem we've got in some ways is,
you know, the, the headline one was around, um,
petrol stations and there's a, you know, flagging
that they may be gradually removed from frontline banking
services, including lending, um, given this ESG kind
of governance approach.
But isn't it true that perhaps, um, petrol stations,
for example, maybe in the future selling hydrogen, um,
and that we are making a judgment now
that is cutting off that future.
And the other one I would throw in, uh,
a couple I'd throw at you would be gold mining.
You know, this is controversial.
Um, be members on this panel, they'll be dead against it
and others that will be pro.
Um, and I guess the question there is who decides?
And, um, as you know,
all banks have a social license to operate.
So how do you kind of differentiate between those two things
and make this workable for the country?
Uh, so let me start with petrol stations
'cause I think that's a great example.
Um, and I confirm that we both continue
to bank petrol stations
and we have been taking on some new petrol stations.
Um, but you need to look at them all
in a case by case basis.
And so an easy example is if I'm looking at a petrol station
in Central Auckland where circa 50%
of all new cars are eves, we'd want to have a conversation
with that petrol station to say,
if you look at your lending in the future
and your ability to meet those repayments,
what plan have you got in place to ensure that
as your petrol sales go down, that you've got other forms
of cash flow that are going to come up, whether
that's hydrogen or using the
forecourt for a different purpose.
Um, if I'm looking at a petrol station in another part
of the country where the adoption of vehicles
for very understandable reasons is longer off,
then there's a potentially different transition risks
that we need to look at with them.
And so our view is
that the EESG assessments are a really important part
of understanding future looking risks.
And our job as a bank is to work with our customers to say,
what's the best way that you can make sure your business
is resilient in the future?
And we take the same approach,
whether it's a petrol station, whether it's a gold mine,
or whether it's another type of business
where there are some future cash flow challenges
that we need to work with our customers to help make sure
that they've thought them through so they end up profitable
for generations to come.
Just a quick follow up. Thank you for that, Catherine.
I guess what you are saying is that, um,
the financial considerations that, uh,
are thrown out in that process are
what your primary concerns are
because you talked about revenue and future revenue
and how you're actually making business decisions,
not the primary question around, I guess
what this bill has been questioning itself is
that you're making a decision purely on, uh, a governance,
uh, approach, if you like,
because trends in governance do vary and they do move.
And, you know, we may be considering very shortly nuclear
energy, so you know, as a whole other raft of moral
and financial issues that will throw themselves up.
So I'm putting words in your mouth now,
but I'm guess I'm saying that you are, uh, saying to us
that your primary concern is the financial longevity
of the business that you're dealing with.
Is that correct?
Yes. My primary, primary focus is to make sure
that our customers are resilient in the long term.
And we're, for example, farmers.
We know that 80% of our export markets
have an interest in the providence
of the goods that they have.
I think it's really important that we work
with our customers to make sure that their goods are going
to be prime export goods again, for years to come
and having those conversations
and actually stepping in and helping to support.
And one of the ones that's been most interesting for me,
we launched the Sustainable Farm Loan,
uh, a couple of years ago.
Over 45% of our lending is now on
that sustainable farm loan.
So that's saying 45% of all of our agri debt.
Um, farmers are saying that they want to sign up
to their own emissions, uh, uh,
at their own carbon intensity reduction plan.
They set the targets themselves, we work with them on it.
Um, and I think it's a great thing about helping New
Zealands to be incredibly viable and relevant in the future.
Thank you, Catherine. I
Suppose what some of the people have said to us is
that David Okay, sorry, was a supplementary.
We have met time, but Catherine
really appreciate you coming in.
Apologies and your written and oral submission.
Thank you. Um, we are gonna move now to Sarah Walters.
Sarah, you're up there.
Good morning. Can everyone hear me okay?
Welcome. Perfect.
We've got you for five minutes,
but please allow time
for questions at the end of your submission.
Okay, thank you. Um,
in reading the general policy statement,
I find numerous issues with the intent of this bill.
It refers to murky environmental social
governance, moralizing.
I believe that's a term that's easily attributable
to this proposed amendment.
Believing this bill is fitting for a first world country.
When this legislation more closely resembles that
of a despotic dictatorship,
and rather than leaving the decision making where it ought
to be, this bill has the opposite effect in taking it away
from the financial institutions being able
to make their own decisions.
Access to banking services
and facilities may be fundamental,
but in a democracy, the right for an organization
to exist must be within the mandate given by society.
And in referring to your previous submitters,
you talked about resilience.
An organization is not resilient if it doesn't have the
mandate to operate in society.
This bill is not the work of a sensible,
well-functioning government calling a general policy
statement referring to good people, childish as an insult
to children, but seems fitting for the level
of maturity shown.
I wondered what a good person might be.
So I entered good person into my weep browser
without the time to run through the 15 traits listed.
I will quote the summary.
Ultimately, it's up to the individual to determine
what they feel are the qualities of a good person.
Clause's 4, 4, 6 Ja does not recognize
that commerce only exists within an environment
and a culture not the other way round
in a democratic New Zealand, this should not be determined
by the government, but
by the society in which the organization exists.
Clause 4, 4, 6, JB does not recognize
that every organization should have choice in who it wishes
to interact with as a customer
and not be penalized for the decision it makes
for the reasons that we're given in this bill.
My submission is that this bill be withdrawn in its entirety
as inappropriate and unnecessary interference from the
government in the market.
It's completely with out of step with
what a first world democratic country should be.
Ultimately, it's up to the financial institutions themselves
to determine what they feel are the qualities
of a good person and decide
who their customers are. Thank you,
Uh, appreciate that. We've got
a question from Andy Foster.
Yeah, Sarah, look, thank you.
Thank you for your submission. Um,
interesting comment you made about who determines the, um,
you said at the end there ultimately should be up
to the financial institution to make its own decisions.
But we also see this whole thing of social license.
We see a lot of times that, um, in this case,
financial institutions, but sometimes other, um, uh,
business organizations are put under a lot of pressure
by part of society.
I won't say all of society, and we never know quite, uh,
or very rarely, no, quite
how much a society thinks that particular way.
What's the, but if, if you take to a logical extent
where you were going, then surely banks should also be
immune from that sort of social
and social pressure,
which we sometimes see protest against banks,
against banks for their decision making.
Any thoughts on that?
I, I think that, um, society needs to, um,
give license to any organization to operate
and them showing their frustration or their unhappiness
or their happiness with an organization and,
and who they choose to support
or not, um, is,
is a good democracy in action.
Um, you, the banks themselves
can process the information they're given from their various
different sources and determine
what the appropriate action is in that time.
Uh, I don't believe it's up to the government to interfere.
Um, traditionally governments only go
where the people have already gone.
And by putting this barrier in place, it locks in a time
and a place which may not have any relevance in the future.
It's, it stops things from developing
and changing as time goes on.
Thank you, Sarah. We have met time.
Appreciate you making your submission
with, with us this morning.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, we are now gonna go
to Iman Fraser.
Welcome. I,
Yes, that's my queue.
It is your queue. We've got you for five minutes,
but feel free to leave a little bit
of time at the end for questions.
Fantastic. Um,
and I think I'll try to, so Koto chair and I'm members of the committee.
Um, so my name's Evan Fraser
and thanks for the opportunity to speak to my submission.
You have my written thoughts and I'll take them as read.
Um, so instead I'm gonna be talking about what, um,
what this bill, uh, actually is and, and what it's not.
Um, so I guess my first thoughts, um,
and I'm coming at this very much from the perspective
of a customer of these organizations, is
that this bill is presented as a shield for fairness.
Um, but it's really not, uh, it's a legislative demand
that the banks kind of ignore social reality.
Um, it's kind of, it's about dismissing,
considering climate risk, social governance factors as, uh,
murky moralizing, um,
and as a citizen, as a customer of a bank, um, I find
that view quite terrifying.
Um, risk is not a moral preference.
It's a financial reality.
When a bank assesses, an industry's business model
is becoming obsolete in a changing world,
that's not a political statement,
it's a prudent commercial decision.
Um, it's the kind of decision that predicts my savings.
Uh, your mortgage, uh, and our economy stability.
Um, to legally compel a bank to ignore these, uh, risks is,
is to compel them to make bad loans.
Uh, it's asking financial guardians
to close eyes and hope for the best.
Uh, it's not a strategy to dereliction duty.
Um, but I think it's worse than that as well, um,
because, uh, this kind of legislation, uh, in an attempt
to kind of remain neutral actually forces these
organizations into becoming potentially unwilling partners
of unethical practices.
Um, so considering the clause
that forbids refusing service based on a client's industry,
um, as was raised in the house, it can force a bank
to continue servicing an entity, um, that
may have had history of labor exploitation.
It could force a bank to enable a business
that has been incredibly accused of laundering money, uh,
evading international sanctions.
Uh, and I'm aware that there's clauses, uh, around this, uh,
for discretionary cases,
but I think discretion here is, is a very,
very dangerous, uh, tool.
So I wanna be very clear that this bank isn't just,
there's this bill rather isn't just asking banks
potentially to be foolish.
It's asking them to potentially be complicit, uh,
to weaponize laws against, you know, our nation
and citizens' values and against our
international obligations.
Um, frankly, uh, to me it feels very much, uh,
a solution in search of a problem.
Um, there are real instances of people
who are remaining truly debunked.
Um, the person leaving prison without a fixed address, um,
uh, victims of domestic violence, fleeing homes
with no ID in their name.
These are the people who are really locked
outta the financial system.
Um, and, and frankly, I'm, I'm quite tired of, uh, coming
to these committees so many times, um, in the recent months
to kind of, to talk about these kinds of issues, uh,
that seem to really sort
of focus on serving narrow interests
rather than public good.
So I come to you today with a very primary
and simple recommendation that's to abandon this bill.
Um, but if you're determined to act then to do
so responsibly and to gut the proposal
and replace it with a simple framework
for procedural fairness, um,
and that's what's stated in my submission.
Thank you, and I welcome any further questions.
Thanks, Iman. Yeah, I note your, um, recommendation there
around a dispute resolution pathway as, um, quite a viable,
um, recommendation.
We'll go now to Ingrid Leary.
Yeah, thank you very much for a really clear
and well written and, uh, well articulated submission.
You mentioned the word and,
and, um, a number of submitters have murky environmental,
social, or governance moralizing.
Is that the language of politics is,
or is that the language of policy in your view?
Uh, well, it's certainly not the language
that I would expect to see in policy.
Uh, that's for sure. Um,
it's very politically charged language
and I don't think it belongs in this kind of legislation.
Uh, David Wilson, we've got time for a quick question.
Thank you, Amon. It is a very, very good
and clear submission.
Thank you for that very much.
Um, one of the issues that we've had,
and we've discussed this, is
that when a bank considers this kind
of ESG governance oversight, uh, compared to
what the financial sustainability of a business is, they say
that it rests mainly in the latter, not the former.
In other words, they have guidelines, uh,
interested in your views around procedural fairness
and how that may influence de decision making.
And thank you for those words too.
Um, well, there's an element here that, you know,
I will profess certain amount of, uh, naivety,
dare I say it, ignorance too.
Um, I'm not a financial, uh, uh,
and by no, by no means is this an area of my, my expertise,
but excuse me.
Um, I guess if I can perhaps answer in a
slightly different way, I think that, um,
the bill's creating two mutually exclusive ideas,
putting them side by side,
where one on one hand you're talking about acting
for a valid commercial reason.
Um, and on one hand you've got, um,
a prohibition from considering, uh, certain factors.
Um, and, uh, I guess the only real, um,
address to that in terms of procedural fairness is
to actually establish a process that makes
that a two-way conversation.
Um, rather than kind of forcing us into this dichotomy, um,
of prohibition and, um,
is this discretion about valid
commercial reasons, I suppose.
Um, and there's a fine line there
that obviously requires a little bit of unpicking.
Um, but I don't think that's been properly addressed.
Okay, thank you. Thank you, Iman.
We'll have to leave it there.
Appreciate you making the time.
Thank you very much for your time.
Uh, members, we're now going to Christopher Hawkins
again in a personal submission capacity.
Welcome Christopher. Um,
Hello. Uh, thank you.
We're in your hands.
Uh, good morning finance and expenditure select committee.
Um, my name is Christopher Hawkins.
I'm a law student at the University of Otago.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak today on the
financial, financial markets, uh, amendments, duty
to provide, duty to provide services, uh, amendment bill.
Um, I'd like to begin on a positive note
by highlighting the one part of this bill
that I do believe has some merit.
Um, section 446 Ja, uh,
subsection one BI, um, you know,
I think all New Zealanders can agree that discrimination
and financial services on the basis
of immutable personal characteristics, um,
in the human rights act like race, religion,
and national origin is wrong.
And it's a good thing that we would, uh, change the law
to provide that.
Um, the problem for me with this bill is that it seems
to create some kind of equivalency
between discrimination due to prejudice towards people
and denial of services, um, due to, uh,
violations of basic, uh, ethical environmental
and social guidelines.
In as much as there is a legitimate concern about financial
institutions, um, overreaching
and basically policing people's, uh, rights to their,
um, policing people's rights to their free expression,
I would support including political opinion within the, uh,
within the protected grounds if the remainder
of the bill targeting ESG guidelines
and other sustainability considerations were to be dropped.
I think the recent trend towards greater environmental
and social responsibility
and financial institutions is something that we really ought
to be celebrating, uh, not going outta our way to punish.
And, and I did, and I did think that this was something
that there, uh, that there was crossbar in agreement on.
So I I was surprised, um, in my view, this,
this bill seeks to force financial institutions
to do business against their stated values
and policies with the full knowledge
that they may be facilitating, um, moral wrongdoing.
It also violates the freedom of conscience
of their employees
and their customers who want to be able
to do an honest days work
and choose companies that they know will have values
that meet their own.
Um, I'd like to say that, uh, for that,
especially for us young people,
but it really should be for everyone
that climate is also an issue of conscience.
Um, as the climate attribution science gets better,
then it becomes increasingly clear
that each fossil fuel project will make immeasurable
contribution to the severity of climate disasters.
Um, you know, such as heat waves, cyclones
and floods, PA closing grave, grave risks
to life and property.
Providing funding
for these projects is both socially irresponsible, uh,
and bad business sense in light of the damage
that they cause our economy, If this bill were to pass,
it would do incalculable damage
to our hard one international reputation as a socially
and environmentally responsible place to do business.
This is one of our competitive advantages
and not something that we should be discarding lightly.
Climate policy is difficult.
It's, it's natural that different governments have different
approaches and choose
to make different trade offs based on values.
I can respect that those efforts, uh,
reflect an underlying acknowledgement of the necessity
of climate action, even if I don't always agree
with the approach that's taken.
What I cannot respect is the attempt of this bill
to bind the hands of the public's, uh, sorry
to bind the hands of the private sector, uh,
and prevent it from making decisions
that are in the public interest.
It appears that the government is not only abandoning
climate commitments, but actively attempting to sabotage
the attempts of those who, uh, do want
to live in their values and make sure
that this planet remains livable.
Thank you. So, oh,
sorry. You got a little bit more, Christopher.
Yeah, so, so my recommendation is
that the bill be abandoned
or at least reformulated to really focus on those personal,
personal characteristics of people to prevent of, to ensure
that people can receive financial services
and not on this kind of war against ESG sort of thing.
I appreciate your time. Uh, Christopher,
we have actually used the full five minutes,
so we don't have time for questions.
Alright. But thank you for your submission this morning.
Alright. Thank you for hearing me.
Uh, we're now gonna go to Julie Smith. Are you there?
Julie?
Can you hear me? I can,
we can hear you. Do you have video at all?
I I should have video. Um, shoot.
I'm very special with, uh, technology.
Where, where do I need to hit? Where do I need to hit?
Where's a good question,
but we can hear You just can't see you there.
Hopefully there's a, a video. Start my
Video. There it is. Here
You go. Welcome, we've
got you for five minutes.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, hi, my name is Julie Smith.
My education, undergrad history,
graduate finance and economics.
I worked for 23 years in the capital markets in the
United States, but most importantly,
I've spent the past 10 years defining
what makes a commonwealth
and western nations great, respected
and abundant.
And this is possible as defined under their by tangy treaty
or constitutions, um,
through a book I'm writing called The Proper Statesman.
As the Y Tangy Treaty Strait States,
New Zealand is a nation under God, and
therefore New Zealand is in covenant
with the irrevocable precepts
of biblical based law and order.
And this is the lens which all facets
of national issues may be solved.
Successful first world countries comply
with biblical based law
and order as it undergirds their legal system.
And your question are ESG scores through banking compatible
with New Zealand law?
And the answer is a hard no.
ESG is a newly packaged Marxism the destroyer of abundance.
In fact, it is a bail bere contract to remove power
and responsibility from the people
and place it in the hands of an authoritarian board.
And we want to make New Zealand the most abundant
and best free nation in the southern hemisphere,
compliant with the Waitangi.
ESG does the opposite.
Permitting ESG
to slither into New Zealand places our heads in the tiger's
Marxist mouth.
ESG twist the understanding of the word morals,
including a new layer of fabricated bureaucracy.
Honestly, banking customers only moral concern pertains
to thou shalt not steal righteous loan contracts
and opposition to usury forcing compliance
with a perverted take on new morals.
And the false religion of environmentalism will enable
theft, which begins incrementally
with punitive additional administrative cost
and then expands to unconscionable limited choices.
Horrifyingly ESG scores would nullify our free speech
and due process laws via social score
and data mining, making judgment a one-sided affair
eradicating the Kiwi Arian philosophy all
included in the marketplace.
Additionally, if you legislate affirmatively for ESG,
you will hit the green light for a
brain drain turning New Zealand into a Cuba without a shot
being fired eradicating the Kiwi Arian.
Oh, I'm sorry. Um, frankly,
this nation cannot endure more self-inflicted brain drain.
First world nations do not negotiate
with corrupt ideologies.
Knowing the Marxist destructive history
of zero wins, first world nations choose life in abundance.
They do not make up god's small Gs their
fathers did not know.
And so let's not be deceived into adopting proven policies
which destroy all nations as it infest
and expects them to work differently here.
There is no new thing under the sun.
And if New Zealand wants to be first,
then we should be the first to say no to blindly intaking
Marxist policies.
And this is how the west reclaims respect and abundance.
Thank you. Uh, Julie, just a quick question
for me in your submission mm-hmm.
What does, and I dunno if I'm saying this right,
what's Mother Gaia financial?
Mother Gaia is, uh, is the, um,
worship of nature.
Okay. All right. Thank you for that clarification. I
Didn't think, I didn't say that though.
I didn't include that in there.
Uh, there's, um, the written submission I have
that references that, um,
Yeah, mother guy would be the worship of nature. Nature,
Okay. Alright. And
I appreciate that we have met time.
Um, so we are gonna move to our next submitter,
but I appreciate you, um, taking time
to make your oral submission today.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, members we're gonna jump to, um,
Fred over Marz.
Uh, are you here? Fred
Readings? Uh, marina, good morning.
Good morning. We've got you for five minutes, sir,
so if you'd like to make a few comments
and leave some time for questions.
Thank you very much. Um, just, uh, so you know
where I'm coming from at this stage of my life, um, I seek
to be a voice for those onto whom we're overwhelmingly
transferring the burden of climate change
and who don't have a voice, the poor, the vulnerable ranu,
future generations and nature.
Um, having watched the first committee session, uh,
where you had the bankers, uh, association
and others, um, speaking very authoritatively to, um,
they, they covered my paragraphs two to five in, in, sorry,
paragraphs two to five in my submission.
So I, I won't deal with that today,
but I'll focus on paragraph six of my submission
and also speak to the wider, um, context of the bill.
Um, I'll show a couple of slides
and I apologize that these likely haven't reached you yet.
Um, this has been a learning
experience for me, how to get this all done.
Um, and I would like to first acknowledge, um, uh,
Mr. Foster, um, the genuine intent of the bill, um,
you know, to address the serious consequences
for affected businesses from the potential
loss of banking services.
You know, and I wanna, I wanna say
that I have compassion about the people
who may be affected by that.
Alongside that, um, the bill in my view seeks
to address a symptom as if the causes are irrelevant.
And I would like to refer you to
this recent Boston
Consulting Group LED report landing the economic case
for climate Action with decision makers.
And the report identifies the first priority for leaders
is the need to reframe the debate
to better reflect the strong economic case
for Paris aligned climate action.
This, let me go to, uh, I've got to juggle screens here.
This graph, um, taken
because it's clear from a similar report from the Climate
Policy Initiative shows that against a current
policies baseline, a three degrees C projected global
economic damages that can be avoided by 2100
by realizing a 1.5 degrees scenario are estimated
to be five times greater than the investment needed by 2050
to achieve that, the uh, BCG report estimates
that the total investment required equals one to 2%
of cumulative global, um, economic output to 2100.
And the return it argues return on this investment is
compelling and net cost of inaction, which is the cost of
not addressing climate change
after accounting for the investment required for mitigation
of adaptation, equates to 11 to 27%
of cumulative global economic output.
So please note too, that the bulk of investment costs come
before 2050 and the bulk of benefits come later.
And inherent here is the intergenerational transfer
of the climate change burden.
Um, just to summarize my, um, perspective on the bill,
um, environmental, social
and climate risks are not moralizing.
The bill does have overreach.
This is my para paragraph six
and my submission, it would legislate away the opportunity
of a bank, shareholders and customers to provide,
to choose providers on the basis of ESG commitments, not
to invest in socially harmful industries like weapons
production, tobacco, or human rights violators landing.
The economic case for climate action
with decision makers shows us that our lives, societies,
and economies face great disruption in the decades ahead,
but greatly less including adaptation costs
greatly less adaptation costs.
If we grasp the 1.5 degrees C net climate change
and the transition to a low carbon economy,
both will create winners and losers As lawmakers.
Lawmakers, I put it to you that your job is
to have the transition be just,
and with the right incentives
that we all arrive there together.
This includes fossil fuel based businesses at risk
of becoming stranded assets, which this, this bill seeks to,
um, address, but also people facing rising premiums, loss
of insurance cover, people forced to relocate
because of storm damage on livable heat
or a rising sea levels, uh, whomsoever.
And, uh, my recommendations to the, to the committee are
that, um, the committee itself recommend the bill will not
proceed that the committee in its report stress
to the government, the principal of having a banking
and insurance systems work for the economic interest of all
during the transition to a low carbon economy, stress
to the government, the need to recognize
and provide help towards the social costs
of a just transition as part
of its climate adaptation framework.
Um, reiterate the committee's recommendation
and the banking competition inquiry report
that the Reserve Bank developed transparent national
guidelines for banks on the application
of climate related risk weighting and pricing.
I think that the word add needs to be in here regarding
how it influences subsequent lending, sorry,
lending practices across different sectors.
And lastly, my recommendation perhaps as a, um,
as a gentle request is
to read this report lending the Economic case
for Climate Action with decision makers.
Thank you for the opportunity
and, um, I welcome your questions.
Thank you, Fred. We, you've actually used all the time,
so we have to leave it there.
But appreciate, um, your submission
and the detail with which you've supplied it.
Thank you. Uh, members, we're now going to go to, uh,
Carol Cowan.
Um, apologies if your name is Carol or Carol.
There are, I've just unmuted. Perfect.
Um, I don't seem to have a visual.
Hopefully you'll have a start video.
Ah, yes, I do. Thank you. There we go. Fantastic.
And is your name and how do you say your name?
Just Carol is fine. Perfect. We've got you
For, I won't go into the story as to why it's an I
Another day, but we've got you
for five minutes, so we're in your hands. Thank you.
So first of all, thank you.
Thank you for this opportunity.
It's really good to have, uh, democracy working in this way.
I will take it that you have read my submission
and that there's a couple of things that I just want
to attend as well, um, to highlight,
rather surprised
that in the general policy statement there is this concept
of moralizing in legislation.
This seems rather as well, I said astonishing, didn't I?
Um, and particularly my, my area of interest is more
with the environmental rather than social and government.
And, um, so why on earth are we looking at moralizing issues
when the science could not be clearer to say
that we have got a climate crisis
and that it is immoral?
Okay, moralizing, um, um, to be, uh,
well, it's unfair on us.
It's unfair on the people who are living
the climate crisis at the moment.
We have the floods that you will be aware of, um,
the heat waves, it's now calculated
500,000 people a year
dying from climate induced fleet.
Heat waves, the science could not be clearer.
Plus we have of interest to all of the politicians here,
80% of the population concerned about the climate.
I see that, uh, one of our minor parties
that is in parliament has the most number of people
who are climate deniers in this country.
3.5% climate deniers.
So let's think about banking and de banking.
I find it again, interesting under neoliberalism, uh,
that we are not looking at any state, um, interference
where we are meant to be saying, Hey,
the market will level everything out.
Um, and, uh,
and yet here we are trying to say to the banks, you can't do
what you think is right and proper.
But at the same time, there is that balance
between the regulators and the banks.
So this amendment seems to be targeting coal mining,
which has become an issue
because of campaigns against the, um, the
bathhurst, um, the financing, no, not the financing,
the servicing the bank services
to bathhurst coal mining on the East coast,
on the west coast of the South island.
The risk management issue is huge.
The fossil fuel sector is a sunset sector.
It, uh, it won't be long until they are untenable
and a huge risk factor.
We should really be looking at regenerative, um, uh,
power generation.
The issue of keeping the lights on burning cold,
keep the lights on is, is a tiger.
Um, and, um, a paper tiger.
Um, we have not invested in the renewable energy
that we should be so poor financial risk.
And I'm suggesting that this bill be in the first instance,
be dismissed, um,
or revamped so that we get rid of the moralizing
and we start following the hard science,
particularly in the environmental,
but also si uh, social and governance.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Carol. We've got probably 30 seconds left
if anyone has a quick question.
Uh, Scott, we'll go to you.
Uh, Kira Carol, thank you. Thank you for your submission.
So, um, banks currently need to, um,
report on environmental social governments risks.
Do you think really that, uh, those risks
that banks should be denied the ability to, to judge risk
to their portfolios, um, through this legislation?
I mean, you've, you've, you've, I've,
I've read your submission and I know
where you're coming from, but, um, you know, why, you know,
why do we need our banks to understand this?
I think if I, I listened
before, um, to the woman from Westpac and, um,
and I think she does understand it.
I think BNZ understands it.
So, uh, I think Kiwi Bank understands it.
Uh, I'm not sure that all banks understand it,
which perhaps is where you get the, the regulators coming in
and saying, banks, you've gotta understand this.
You've gotta take note of it.
Um, I'm not an expert in this area.
Um, uh,
but that's my, you know, as a general citizen, um, you know,
that, that's my thinking.
Hey, thank you Carol. Really
appreciate your submission today.
Thank you for joining us. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, we're now gonna go to Dr. Debbie Hager.
Welcome. Uh, Deborah
or Debbie, I'm not sure
you've come up both ways for me here,
Kia. Yeah, I'm Debbie
Hager.
Um, I think this bill is both ironic and hypocritical.
The government claims to want
to reduce unnecessary legislation and regulation.
Yet, as other people have said,
here we are again discussing more legislation.
And this time it's to regulate the banks
and the financial institutions that are at the heart
of the capitalist system.
That this coalition privileges, as I said in my submission,
the language of the Bill's purpose identifies
that this bill is entirely ideological
as it talks about murky environmental, social,
or governance, moralizing
and removes moralizing from banking.
Why is moral the morality of saving the planet a bad thing?
Ethical investment is an equally to quote, valid
and commercial ground for decision making.
So this bill is an oxymoron.
It's taking a moral stand against taking a moral stand.
The bill further says that it will, this is a quote,
stop good people and good companies losing fundamental
services because of how they think and what they do.
I think there's two things here.
If a bank that wants
to make a profit is withdrawing services, it suggests
that there's something inherently wrong
with the concept being invested in, but also good
and bad I moral concepts.
And we each have our own values, my values,
and those of many people, including many
of the people speaking today, prioritize saving the planet
and the ecosystem this bill seeks to prioritize.
Those who choose short-term profit
exploitation and destruction.
That's a moral choice,
but it's one that sentences all humans good
and bad to extinction other than furthering profit
for a few who exploit the land and destroy this ecosystem.
This bill has no merit.
So I recommend that you throw it out. Thank you.
Uh, thank you for that. Just see if we've got any
questions, uh, for you amongst the panel.
Uh, yep. Scott Willis.
Thank you, Debbie.
Um, it's, uh, a very, very precise
and, uh, effective submission.
Thank you. So we do, um, get, have
the need to have good legislation,
and sometimes there's good legislation and bad legislation
and murky legislation.
This, um, I'm interpreting
and I I agree with you,
looks like it's not the most effective way we could use
government process to improve the lot of, of New Zealanders.
What do you think if, if, is there anything we could do
to improve this bit of legislation
or should we just throw it out?
Well, I think the only way that this piece
of legislation could be improved is to completely turn it
around and to suggest that banks not
invest in things that harm the environment
and harm the earth in the ecosystem.
So it would mean not investing in the destruction
of the marine environment by mining, by dredging,
by doing those things, not mining on land,
those things which are harming us
and which we know are throwing us towards, um,
the next extinction.
And if I could have a supplementary, um, chair. Sure.
Thank you. So do you think, given where this
come from, do you think there's, there's a need
for politicians to,
to learn a little bit more about climate science and,
and about the state of, of, of health of our ecosystems
to ensure that future legislation isn't so, um,
doesn't ignore the risks we all face?
Well, I'm a doctor of public health, so I believe
that every, it would be very useful if people could
understand the underlying determinants of health
and how those impact, um, on populations
and the broader environment so
that we can make good decisions.
Yes.
Thank you. And a quick one from David Wilson.
I can't hear him Neither.
David, you're on mute. There you go.
Sorry, Deborah. Um, just one, if you think
that these kinds of ethical decisions need
to be made at government level.
I think that every piece
of legislation is an ethical decision.
I don't believe that anything is objective.
I believe that we make decisions based on our ideological
understanding and our own moral values.
And so it's inevitable
that decisions will be made on that basis.
It's just that I think that we can't, this, this piece
of legislation, as I said, is, is kind of oxymoronic
because it's, it's pretending
that there's something which is objective and okay,
and dissing those who think differently.
I think that there needs to be a more intelligent
and constructive discussion
before legislation is made that looks at the broader,
broader situation.
Thank you. Uh, thank you
for your submission, Deborah. Appreciate that.
Thank you. Uh, members, we're gonna go
to our actual jump ahead to our final submitter weer gut,
um, and come, come back to Fed Farmers, I think after that.
Um, good morning, sir. Are you there?
Good morning. Um, unfortunately my camera doesn't work.
I, I, I don't understand it, but, but I checked it.
No problem. We can hear you. So there you go.
Okay. Um, yes, I'm Werna Goer.
I'm a naturalized New Zealander since 1986.
Before my retirement,
I was an IT manager at Food Stars for 20 years.
So I'm in full support of this bill
as it is a critically stepped forward, ensuring that access
to financial services
and transactions is a, is recognized
as a fundamental right, not a privilege.
The practice of denying such services
and transactions based on subjective factors or com
or non-commercial grounds
is a direct assault on consumer's rights comparable
to impact on physically to physically harm.
Therefore, I recommend the following requirements,
the following refinements to strengthen the bill.
One, the scope includes financial services
and any financial transactions
the consumer wishes to undertake.
Two, strengthening the penalties to reflect
the severity of breaches.
Breaches are deliberate acts that cause harm.
These are not mere negligence,
but akin to intentional assaults.
Therefore, imprisonment would be the appropriate deterrent.
Three, the funder
must reverse any withdrawal
or denial immediately if the consumer requests
to do so, or in case
of a dispute, the offender
must provide mandated evidence to the police.
These ones are my recommendations
for strengthening the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you for that. Uh,
we have a question from, uh, Scott Willis?
Yes. Uh, Kira Werna, thank you for your submission.
So if I understand correctly, your arguing
that anyone should have access to, um, financial services
regardless of what they do.
Is, is that correct? And,
and then if, if, if I could, um, ask a further
supplementary, um, chair, but that's my first question.
Yes. Sure, sure.
Anybody should have access to financial services.
So, so financial services for me is any,
any person doing, um, banking, uh,
in a, in, um, doing, doing banking transactions in, in,
in an environment.
And today there is hardly any, any,
well, it is, it is based almost a cashless society.
So, so, uh, my, my supplementary is, so if I wanted
to, um, sell p
and I needed a loan to, um, to engage in, in, in, um,
drug production
and sale in our community, I should be given access
to those financial services.
Is that, is that, is that what you're arguing?
Yes. Okay. Thank you. That's, um, interesting.
So when,
and when you're saying, so let's stick with that analogy.
If I, a couple, couple
of supplementaries, please bear with me. Um,
One more Scott, Then, um, if I'm, um, if I'm selling p
and it's causing harm, I could, you know,
under your argument, I could then be imprisoned
or pay a fine.
But likewise, if I gave money to a coal mine that,
that causes climate change, I should be also,
Excuse, excuse me, I'm, I, I probably misunderstood
your question completely.
No, certainly this, I'm not, I'm not for that.
No, I mean, I mean, just normal transactions. Any, anything.
Well, having a bank account or, or making, making deposits
or doing an investment.
This is what, what I mean was anybody should,
should be able to participate in banking.
Not, not, not, not for dubious
and illegally illegal protections. No, not.
Okay. We'll go to Andy Fos for a, a wrap up question.
Yeah, thanks. Uh, I thought you might have
misunderstood what Scott was asking.
Um, all of this argument is about, um,
not providing banking services, uh, to legal businesses.
Uh, is that the way you understand it, as opposed
to illegal businesses, which certainly p is Yes,
yes. Is illegal.
Yeah, sure. No, thank you.
That's, that's very helpful to,
um, and have that clarification.
Yes. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you Werner
for your submission this morning.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Uh, members with,
it looks like the only submitted
remaining is Federated Farmers.
Um, they're not on till 11, which is only four minutes away.
So, uh, the suggestion is we just have a three minute break
and come back and we will finish
this af this morning's session with them.
Uh, welcome back members, uh, tn. We've got Oliver there.
Uh, yep.
Uh, welcome Oliver from, uh, federated Farmers.
Is it just yourself this morning?
I'm very much hoping that Mark Hooper is about to show up.
He's currently trying to get online now.
I hope he doesn't leave you stranded. No wingman.
Yeah. I'm just the wingman here,
but I'm happy to, to speak if I need to jump in.
But ideally Mark is about to jump in any moment.
Okay. I'll give him a minute.
You are our final submitter for today, I believe.
How's it been going? Oh, no, it's, um, been good.
Yeah, we've had a range of submissions, um,
you might have to lead off.
Okay. And, um, our team will let him in if he comes.
Okay. Well, look, firstly, thank you very much
and as this is the final submission, um, really appreciate,
uh, having the time to speak here today.
Yeah, sorry. Fantastic.
Great padding. Can I just say,
Just, uh, keep the ball rolling, right?
So he is. So Mike, when I last submission, it's the last
for the subcommittee, but there is another session
of hearings this afternoon. Uh,
Did, do you say he is here?
Uh, yeah, they'll be trying to upgrade him to a panelist
and he might, so he is just gotta accept that.
Um, but might I suggest you just,
Okay. Yeah. I, I mean,
look, the,
the initial padding was just gonna be that we,
broadly speaking, um, welcome the, um, welcome the bill,
um, as it addresses, um, a growing concern
amongst our members around being Deb banked.
Um, this has been particularly true when we've seen it
happen with the rural petrol stations
and the BNZ example, which this committee has had the, um,
um, opportunity to talk to BNZ directly about.
And this is, uh, um, so we broadly,
um, accept the intent of this bill.
Um, and that's also
because, um, new Zealand's economy,
particularly the rural sector, we rely on banking as the way
that we can get access to capital to be able to buy farms.
Um, the primary example that we use
to support this is the BN Z's withdrawal from
the fuel retail lending.
Um, which demonstrates how one bank's internal
policies can cascade into sort
of a market-wide exclusion severely, um,
impacting rural communities where, uh,
fuel stations are vital.
And now Mark is here,
Uh, welcome Mark. Just
turn your video on if you could. I can see your hand.
Just need to start the video.
Yeah, sorry. I've been, um, been having
a little bit of trouble with it.
Uh, I've been in a number of times
and then it's dropped out on me for some reason.
So I'm just trying to work out
why the video is not,
Have you got a start video
At the bottom left of the screen there says audio
and video, and then you just need to click on the video,
Keeps on dropping the out for some reason.
Just, uh,
We, we can hear you Mark anyway,
so if you wanna just start your submission
and, uh, we'll work in with Oliver here.
I'll just be the face of it. Yeah.
How does, how does that sound?
We can hear you fine. Okay.
Let's just, uh, get one more second to
See, it's not giving me an option to turn the video on.
Okay. Uh, look, um, in order to
avoid taking up any more of your time, um,
which we very much appreciate, I think as, um,
as Oliver has indicated, um, yeah, we, um,
we support the intent of, uh, this particular bill
as it addresses, um, you know, growing concerns
of our rural members, particularly about banks overstepping
into, um, ideological judgements that threaten access
to future financial services.
And, and more importantly, I think, um, access
to new capital flow.
Um, we would say that the bill is timely in the sense of,
um, of needing to, uh, restore balance
between commercial discretion and democratic oversight.
Um, or in other words, ensuring that, uh,
lawful responsible businesses in rural New Zealand cannot be
denied services on arbitrarily or on ideological grounds.
Um, new Zealand's economy, particularly in rural areas, um,
relies on broad access to financial services, uh,
and the flow of future investment capital.
Um, and with limited limited banking alternatives, um,
good access to our major, um, banks is essential, um,
for economic performance and community viability.
What we notice is that our members are increasingly
concerned that, um,
banks could potentially withdraw services from lawful
businesses, not based on credit risk or commercial concerns,
but on subjective reputational criteria driven
by offshore frameworks such
as the Net Zero Banking Alliance.
Um, the 2025 Federated Farmers Banking Survey, um,
showed strong support for legislative protection.
Uh, 70% of respondents, uh,
back the law preventing back banks from withdrawing services
solely for environmental reasons.
Uh, environmental being there in the kind
of broader sense of the term.
Um, not that they don't support, um, uh,
environmental initiatives per se.
Um, the survey highlighted, um, uh,
non-financial factors creeping into lending about 18%
of farmers report being asked about their emissions profile
or environmental footprint during loan discussions.
Um, and that made that the number one pain point, um,
that respondents had with banks.
That did vary, uh, quite a bit, um, from, from bank
to bank at the time of the survey in May, um, uh,
a SB and Westpac, uh, customers reported the highest level
of, um, of requests for that information,
40% and 32% respectively,
whereas other banks were quite a bit lower.
Rabo and BNZ, for example, at the other end, 15
and 7% respectively.
Um, but, but certainly an increasing level
of engagement there, which was often perceived as intrusive
and unrelated to core banking.
Um, one of the quotes, for example, from our survey, uh,
was our biggest bugbear is the requesting greenhouse gas
emission numbers and environment information.
We believe they're a bank loaning money
and should stick to their own core business, end of quote.
So such, um, practices erode trust
and, um, introduce uncertainty and, um, and
therefore support for a a law change is relatively high in
that, uh, 70 to 75% range.
One of the, uh, just by way of reflection, I think, um,
one of the, the reasons that there is a high level
of uncertainty, uh, around that is of course the,
the climate change reporting data, for example, is, is very
variable in terms of, uh,
what value people consider it might add.
So for example, if I provide my, uh, fonterra report
to a bank, that will be a CO2 equivalent number per kg
of fat protein corrected milk calculation.
Um, which doesn't really have any correlation
to our national
or gas, uh, reduction targets of, um,
of a 51 50 5% by 2035, which is a, a,
a gross reduction.
That of course sits alongside a split gas approach with, uh,
a 24 to 47% absolute reduction in
methane by 2050.
Um, which has also a net zero a a a net target
for zero of long gases.
Um, and then we have, um, you know,
a sustainable finance taxonomy proposed with a,
a total, uh, one ton CO2 equivalent target per hectare,
um, as a qualification for a whole farm taxonomy criteria.
Um, banks talk about, um, collecting efficiency data,
but you know, how that relates
to financial risk is not clear.
So there's just huge variation in the numbers.
MPI has spent a considerable amount of time, um, trying
to work on a single, uh, greenhouse gas calculator.
I'm not entirely sure where that is at,
but, um, even if there was a single calculator, the um,
the level of variability, um,
because of the number of assumptions as a farmer that I have
to put into it would still make it, um, quite variable.
Um, and that, that's similar I guess to, uh, other, uh,
environmental reporting such as, um, around nutrients where,
um, attempts to use overseer, for example,
as a a regulatory tool have failed, works quite well
as a farm management tool,
but in terms of a regulatory tool, um,
there's just too much variability.
So I think this is, yes,
I'm just, I'm just mindful of time, uh, um,
'cause we've got a few questions too,
so maybe if you just wanna make some closing comments.
Sure. So I think the key thing here is that, uh,
we've got concerns that we hear from other circles that, um,
that primary industries is regarded
as potentially a sunset industry.
And, um, and it requires good growth,
it require, requires good flow of capital,
it requires confidence and certainty.
And for that regard, we think parliament must retain
control, um, access
to finance should be grounded in New Zealand law
and not in private reputational standards
or offshore commitments without domestic
authority. Thank you.
Thanks. Alright, I'll go to, um, honorable Duncan,
we first 'cause he hasn't had a question. Oh,
Kra, thank you for that Mr. Chair.
Look, I just really for um, a point of clarification,
um, there's some, uh, farmers out there
and I'm thinking of, uh, glory Vale on the West coast,
which are accused of engaging in quite illegal practices.
For example, serious breaches of employment law
and arguably, um, you know, slavery practices.
Um, now are you suggesting that a bank can't look at
that and say you are so in breach of the law
that we are not gonna finance you?
Or are you really just talking about
farmers whose practices are within the law and
therefore the bank shouldn't be making kind
of value judgements about that?
Well, I, I mean, if you take the example
that you gave there, then if, if
that organization is in breach of a different law,
then um, presumably there would be a process of
investigation and prosecution associated with that
and, uh, that, that might, it might create some risk,
but that, that shouldn't be a decision for the bank.
So, no, just to be clear there.
So what you're saying, I'm quite surprised about
that you're saying that a bank can be on notice
that there's slavery practices going on
and continue to finance support that
by provision providing finance.
Is that right?
Well, if, if any business businesses operating outside
of the law, then presumably some other law
will apply to them.
And so, so so that, that's, that,
that will be dealt accordingly.
So you might, you might end up getting fined for that,
but that, how does that relate to
the performance of the overall business?
I mean, the, the point here is, is
that this bill is focusing on farmers
that are operating within lawful activity anyway.
Well, it does sound that you sa telling me
that the bank should turn a blind eye to serious misconduct,
but that's, if that's your position.
Thanks for clarifying.
No, I didn't say that. Okay.
Um, we'll go to quick question from Scott Willis
and then Andy Foster, if we can.
Right. Thank you. Thank you, Oliver. Thank you, mark.
Um, so I know many farmers
who are really engaged in reducing emissions
and in producing sustainably,
and I see, uh, Rabobank says we are supporting a transition
to a resilient future by working alongside our clients
to profitably transition to lower carbon
and more sustainable production system.
So this, this is, is, is good stuff.
Are you arguing that some of the
offshore frameworks like the New Zealand
EU free trade agreement are things
that we should just ignore?
We shouldn't worry about this as a risk.
Do are, are you saying that, that you'd rather support
the type of approach that will increase risk to
a major external market?
Or, or would you, or
because that's what this, this bill will do?
Or would, would you rather that we enable our farmers
to make choices and have access
to capital to do the right thing?
Yeah, so obviously the intent of the bill is that those
that are doing the right thing would have
good access to capital.
And, and as I was, uh, pointing out there earlier,
there's considerable, uh, there's considerable
variation I suppose, in the reporting of that data
and how it might relate to what you're talking about.
But the point is, is that if farmers are got confidence
and certainty around flow of investment,
they'll make the appropriate decisions based
on market signals.
They don't need an ex external financial organization
to determine, uh, what those signals, um,
or what those activities might be.
Okay, thank you. And final question, Andy Foster.
Yeah. Look in, in two parts.
Um, the first one of those is we've heard quite a bit mark,
um, about sunset in, uh,
industries, uh, in inverted commerce.
Um, and, and I, what I'm hearing from you,
I think you've explicitly said it is the concern
that farmers might be seen as, um, being part
of a a sunset industry.
Is there any way or any role that you think
that parliament could take, uh, in essentially saying, well,
look, these are industries which we explicitly think are
Sunset industries.
Anything that's not in that list is not, um, so that,
you know, parliament is standing behind, uh,
what are effectively legal businesses
except there's a risk in that.
Um, and that different
parliaments might have different views on that.
And the second question I wanted
to ask you about is you've made some very useful, uh,
suggestions around potential amendments to the, to the bill,
um, and one of them in particular,
we've heard a little bit about transparency in your 8.2,
you talk a little bit about that.
Um, and should there be some obligation on financial
institutions which are, um, denying services, uh,
or withdrawing services
to actually be quite clear about the reasons behind that
and that they are and,
and the financial justification for that as opposed
to any other justification?
So, two parts of the question.
Yeah. So look in the, in the first instance, I think, um,
you know, at the, at the moment we have, uh,
some broad national goals of, um, of going for growth,
uh, a sort of doubling of the export value of,
um, our primary sector.
It's currently sitting at a, uh, 60 billion,
uh, dollar industry.
And, um, over the next decade, growing that to a hundred,
$120 billion industry is really important
for New Zealand as a whole.
And so we want to make sure
that we are creating an environment
where there is confidence for investors
to be putting, um, money into that sector in order for it
to grow and achieve that kind of outcome.
So I think that's the big picture.
What we're saying is that some of the questions
that have been asked are only creating uncertainty.
It's not clear how they relate to actual risk
or growth of the sector.
And so in a sense, we're just wanting to make sure
that there is good democratic oversight to enable
that process to happen.
Um, recognizing that, you know, there will be differences
of views between, um, various parliaments,
but we should, um, at least set the groundwork
where there's confidence
for future investment in order to grow the sector.
Thanks, mark. That was a very clear answer.
I think we'll leave it there. Uh, members we're,
we're slightly over, but appreciate, uh, fed farmers, uh,
Mark Hooper and Oliver for your, um, submission today.
Cheers guys. Thank you, uh, members, that's the end
of our part today, I think,
unless you're involved in the subcommittee meeting,
I think at two o'clock this afternoon.
Um, but um, yeah, appreciate your time
and we'll see you in Wellington two tomorrow.
Thanks, Taran. And team. Alright, thanks Ryan. Thank you Mr.